---
layout: items/selections
custom_label: "Antiochus of Syracuse, Fragment 13 + Ephorus, Fragment 216 = Strabo, Geography 6.3.2-3"
source_id: antiochus_ephorus_strabo
subjects: Greeks Overseas;Colonization
location_ids: sparta;messenia;taras
preface: "Two contrasting stories about the foundation of the colony of Taras, in southern Italy, in the aftermath of the Spartan conquest of the neighboring region of Messenia."
footnotes:
  - The non-Greek neighbors of Taras.
  - From Greek *parthenos* = maiden.
---

2. About the foundation of Taras, Antiochus says that after the Messenian War, those Spartans who did not participate in the campaign were judged to be slaves and were called Helots, and the sons born to them during the campaign were called Partheniae and deprived of citizenship. But they resisted (since there were many of them) and formed a conspiracy against the citizens. Discovering the plot, the citizens sent some men, who by pretending to be friendly to the conspirators were going to bring to light the details of the conspiracy. One of these men was Phalanthus, who pretended to be their leader, but in reality disagreed with their plan. It was agreed to attack during the Hyacinthia festival, while the contest in the Amyclaion was being held, when Phalanthus put on a hat, since the citizen could be recognized by their long hair. But since Phalanthus and his side had secretly reported on the plan, while the contest was happening, a herald came forward and told Phalanthus not to put on his hat. Some of the conspirators, realizing that they had been betrayed, fled and others became suppliants. The citizens put them under guard, telling them not to worry, and send Phalanthus to ask Apollo at Delphi about founding a colony. The answer was "I give you Satyrion and Taras, a rich land, to found your city, and to be a scourge for the Iapygians."<a href="#note-1">1</a></sup> Therefore the Partheniae came there with Phalanthus, and the barbarians received them along with the Cretans who held the land before.

3. Ephorus, on the other hand says about the foundation of Taras that the Spartans were waging war against the Messenians who killed King Teleclus of Sparta, who had come to Messene for a sacrifice. The Spartans swore not to return home before they either captured Messene or died to the last man. When they marched out, they left behind the youngest and oldest citizens as guards of the city. In the tenth year of the war, the Spartan women gathered and sent some of their number to criticize the men for not fighting the war against the Messenians on an equal basis, inasmuch as the Messenians, living at home, were having children, but the Spartans, encamped in a foreign land, were leaving their wives as widows, and there was a risk that their country would be empty of men. The Spartans, both keeping their oath and heeding the women’s advice, sent the youngest and most robust men from the army, who had not participated in the oath because they had still been youths when they marched out together with the mature men. They told these young men to sleep with all the maidens, thinking that in this way a lot of children would be born. When this happened, these children were called the Partheniae.<a href="#note-2">2</a></sup> ... [After the defeat of Messenia] the Spartans did not give the Partheniae equal civic rights, since they were born out of wedlock. So the Partheniae, banding together with the helots, formed a conspiracy against the Spartan citizens. They arranged that raising a Spartan hat in the agora would be the signal to attack. When some of the helots betrayed the conspiracy, the Spartans recognized that counter-attacking would be difficult, since the conspirators were many and united, since they thought of each other as brothers. So they ordered the conspirators who were going to raise the signal to leave the agora. The conspirators, realizing that their plot had been betrayed, held off. The Spartans, through the agency of their fathers, persuaded them to go out to found a colony. If they could secure a suitable site, they would stay; if not, they could return and one-fifth of the land of Messenia would be distributed among them. The men who were sent out found the Achaeans making war on the barbarians, and sharing in these battles they founded Taras.