---
layout: items/selections
source_id: thucydides_histories
citation_start: 1.24
citation_end: 25
subjects: Greeks Overseas;Colonization
location_ids: epidamnus;corcyra;corinth
preface: "Thucydides describes the flawed colonial relationships between Corinth, Corcyra, and Epidamnus (the mother-city, colony, and subcolony, respectively). Although colonies were supposed to have friendly relations with their mother-city, these three did not, and Thucydides’ description gives a sense of what Greeks thought was acceptable."
---

24. The city of Epidamnus is located on the right as one sails north into the Adriatic Sea, and their nearest neighbors were barbarians, an Illyrian tribe called the Taulantians. [2] Corcyra colonized Epidamnus; the founder was Phalius, son of Eratocleidas, a Corinthian and a descendent of Heracles, who had been summoned from Corcyra’s mother-city [Corinth] according to the old custom. Some Corinthians settled there, too, along with others of Dorian ethnicity. [3] As time passed, Epidamnus became powerful and populous. [4] But they fell into civil strife against each other for many years, it is said, and they were defeated in a war with the neighboring barbarians and lost much of their power. [5] Finally, shortly before the Peloponnesian War, the lower classes forced out the aristocrats, who joined forces with the barbarians and attacked those who controlled the city, plundering them by land and sea. [6] Since the Epidamnians in the city were in a difficult situation, they sent envoys to Corcyra, since it was their mother-city, asking them not to ignore the fact that they were perishing, but to reconcile them with the exiled aristocrats and to end the war with the barbarians. [7] They made this request while sitting as suppliants at the temple of Hera. The Corcyreans, however, did not accept their supplication, but sent them away without obtaining what they wanted.

25. The Epidamnians, recognizing that they would get no assistance from Corcyra, were at a loss for how to solve their problem. So they sent to Delphi and asked the god whether they should hand over the city to the Corinthians as their founders and try to get help from them. The god answered that they should hand over the city and consider the Corinthians as their leaders. [2] The Epidamnians went to Corinth and handed over the city according to the oracle, declaring that their founder was from Corinth and showing the oracle, and they asked Corinth not to ignore the fact that they were perishing but to help them. [3] The Corinthians gave them assistance, both thinking that it was the right thing to do, since the colony belonged to them no less than to Corcyra, but also because they hated Corcyra, because although they were Corinthian colonists, they neglected their mother-city. [4] They did not provide at public festivals the honors that were customary for founders, nor at sacrifices did they offer the first portion of meat to a Corinthian, as the other colonies did, but they treated them with contempt, even though they were just as wealthy as anyone else in Greece at that time, and even stronger militarily. 