---
layout: items/selections
source_id: thucydides_histories
citation_start: 6.2
citation_end: 5
subjects: Greeks Overseas;Colonization
location_ids: segesta;eryx;phocis;motya;solous,panormus;naxos;syracuse;leontini;catana;megara_hyblaea;selinus;gela;akragas;messina;himera;acrae;casmenae;camarina;chalcis;corinth;megara;rhodes;crete;cumae
preface: "A lengthy outline of the various Greek colonies established in Sicily, their non-Greek neighbors, and some basic data and brief stories about them. The dates in <angle brackets> have been calculated by modern scholars on the basis of Thucydides’ text."
footnotes:
  - Two mythical peoples from Homer’s Odyssey, which some said was set partly in Sicily.
  - Greeks from Phocis in central Greece.
  - Sacred envoys regularly traveled to places like Delphi or Olympia to consult the oracle, compete in the games, etc.
  - Megara in mainland Greece.
  - A region of Italy later known as Campania.
  - Messenia in the Peloponnese.
---

2. This is how Sicily was settled in very early times, and how many nations occupied it in total. At the very beginning, the Cyclopes and Laestrygonians<sup><a href="#note-1">1</a></sup> are said to have inhabited some part of the land, but I do not know of what race they were or where they came from or to where they departed. So what poets have said and what any individual thinks will be sufficient on that topic. [2] After them, the Sicanians were apparently the first to settle there, or even, earlier than the mythical races, as they say themselves, because they were indigenous. But as the truth has been discovered, they were originally Iberians, who were driven away from the Sicanus River in Iberia by the Ligurians. The island then came to be called Sicania, whereas previously it was called Trinacria. They still live there in the west of Sicily. [3] After the sack of Troy, some of the Trojans who were fleeing the Achaeans by ship came to Sicily. They settled next to the Sicanians and came to be called Elymians; their cities were Eryx and Segesta. Some Phocians<sup><a href="#note-2">2</a></sup> coming from the Trojan War joined them after being driven in a storm first to Libya and then to Sicily. [4] The Sikels crossed to Sicily from Italy, where they lived previously, fleeing the Opicians. Probably (and according to oral tradition) they made the crossing on rafts, waiting on shore until the wind was right to cross the strait – or perhaps they sailed across in some other way. There are still Sikels in Italy, and the whole land of Italy is so called because of Italus, king of the Sikels. [5] A large army of Sikels came to Sicily, defeated the Sicanians in battle, and forced them towards the southern and western parts of the island. They caused the name of the island to be changed from Sicania to Sikelia, and they settled there, holding the most fertile lands for around 300 years before the Greeks came to Sicily. Even now they still inhabit the northern and central parts of the island. [6] Phoenicians also lived all around Sicily, on promontories along the coast and offshore islands, in order to trade with the Sikels. But when many Greeks sailed to Sicily, the Phoenicians abandoned most of these places and settled in Motya, Solous, and Panormus, living near the Elymians, both because they relied on their alliance with them and because the crossing from Sicily to Carthage is the shortest there. That’s how many barbarians inhabited Sicily and how they settled there.

3. The first Greeks to settle in Sicily were Chalcidians from Euboea who founded Naxos, sailing with Thucles as the oikist <734 BCE>. They founded the altar of Apollo the Leader (Archegetes), which is now outside the city and where sacred envoy<sup><a href="#note-3">3</a></sup> offer sacrifice whenever they leave Sicily. [2] In the next year <733 BCE>, Archias, a descendent of Heracles from Corinth, founded Syracuse, driving out the native Sikels from the island on which the inner city is located, although it is no longer fully surrounded by sea, since later the outer city was fortified as well, and the city became very populous. [3] Thucles and the Chalcidians set out from Naxos five years after the foundation of Syracuse <728 BCE> and founded Leontini, after driving out the Sikels. After that, they also founded Catana, but the Catanians chose Euarchus as their oikist.

4. At around the same time <728 BCE>, Lamis arrived in Sicily, bringing a colony from Megara. He settled a place called Trotilus, beyond the Pantacyus river, but later for a short time joined the Chalcidian colony at Leontini. After being expelled by the Leontinians, they settled at Thapsus, but there Lamis himself died. Finally the other Megarians departed from Thapsus when Hyblon, a Sikel king, gave them land and led them to found a city which they called Megara Hyblaea. [2] They lived there for 245 years, until they were expelled from their city and territory by Gelon, the tyrant of Syracuse <483 BCE>. Before they were expelled and 100 years after they settled in Megara, they founded Selinus, sending Pamillus as the oikist, and he also brought Megarians from the mother-city,<sup><a href="#note-4">4</a></sup> to join the colony. [3] Gela was jointly founded by Antiphemus of Rhodes and Entimus of Crete, 45 years after the foundation of Syracuse <688 BCE>. The city was named after the river Gela, but the place where the acropolis now is and which was first fortified was called Lindii, and they use Dorian customs. [4] The Geloans founded Akragas 108 years after their own foundation <580 BCE>, naming the city after the river Akragas, choosing as oikists Aristonous and Pystilus, and using the same customs as Gela. [5] Zancle was originally settled by pirates from Cumae, a Chalcidian city in Opicia,<sup><a href="#note-5">5</a></sup> but later many others came from Chalcis and the rest of Euboea and shared the land with them. The oikists were Perieres of Cumae and Crataemenes of Chalcis. The name Zancle was originally a Sikel word meaning “sickle,” since the harbor was shaped like a sickle. Later the Zancleans were expelled by the Samians and other Ionians, who came to Sicily fleeing the Persians. [6] Soon afterward, however, Anaxilas, the tyrant of Rhegium, expelled the Samians and refounded the city himself, bringing in a mixed population and renaming it Messina after his own ancestral homeland.<sup><a href="#note-6">6</a></sup>

5. Himera was colonized from Zancle by the oikists Eucleides, Simus, and Sakon, and mostly Chalcidians settled there, but they were joined by a group of Syracusans called the Myletidae, who had gone into exile after being defeated in factional strife there. The dialect spoken in Himera is a mixture of Dorian and Chalcidian, but the customs of the Chalcidians prevail. [2] Acrae and Casmenae were founded by Syracuse – the former 70 years after Syracuse <763 BCE> and the latter 20 years after that <743 BCE>. [3] Camarina was initially founded by Syracuse 135 years after the foundation of Syracuse <598 BCE>, and the oikists were Dascon and Menecolus. Later Camarina revolted and was destroyed by Syracuse in war, and after that Hippocrates, the tyrant of Gela, took the land of Camarina as ransom in exchange for Syracusan prisoners of war, and he refounded Camarina with himself as oikist. When the Camarinaeans were expelled again by Gelon, the city was refounded for a third time by Gela.