---
layout: items/selections
source_id: thucydides_histories
citation_start: 3.92
subjects: Greeks Overseas;Colonization
location_ids: herclea;sparta;doris;euboea
preface: "A colony founded by the Spartans in central Greece during the Peloponnesian War gives a sense of the procedures that were normal at that time."
footnotes:
  - A region in central Greece, north of Delphi.

---

At about the same time, the Lacedaemonians established a colony at Heraclea in Trachis,<sup><a href="#note-1">1</a></sup> for the following reason. [2] The Malians were divided into three subgroups, the Paralians, the Irians, and the Trachinians. Of these, the Trachinians had been defeated in a war with their neighbors, the Oetaeans. At first, they planned to hand themselves over to the Athenians, but were afraid that Athens would not be a reliable ally, so they approached Sparta, sending Tisamenus as their ambassador. [3] The people of Doris, which was the mother-city of Sparta, joined the embassy and made the same request, since they were faring badly against the Oetaeans. [4] When the Spartans heard about this, they decided to send out a colony, wanting to get vengeance for the Trachinians and Dorians, and also the new city seemed well situated for the war against Athens. They could prepare a fleet there for an expedition against Euboea, since the crossing would be short, and it would be useful on a journey to Thrace. So everything made them eager to settle the place. [5] They first consulted the god at Delphi, and when the god approved, they sent settlers, both Spartan citizens and perioikoi. They also invited any of the other Greeks who wanted to come with them, except the Ionians and Achaeans and some others. Three Spartan oikists, named Leon, Alcidas, and Damagon, led the colonists. [6] When they arrived, they fortified the city anew, which is now called Heraclea, located about five miles from Thermopylae and 2.5 miles from the sea. They also built dockyards and walled off Thermopylae at the pass itself, so that it would be easily guarded.