---
layout: items/selections
source_id: herodotus_histories
citation_start: 2.152
citation_end: 54
subjects: Greeks Overseas;Mercenaries
location_ids: ionia;caria;bubastis;memphis
preface: "The Egyptian pharaoh Psammetichus I (664-610 BCE) seized power using Greek mercenaries, who afterward stayed in Egypt."
footnotes:
  - A non-Greek region of Asia Minor adjacent to Ionia. Carian mercenaries often appear alongside Greeks in Egypt.
---

152. [3] Psammetichus was plotting how to get revenge on those who had exiled him. He therefore sent to the city of Buto, which has the oracle most trusted by Egyptians, and a prophesy came back that he would get his revenge when bronze men appeared from the sea. [4] Psammetichus absolutely did not believe that bronze men would come from the sea to help him, but soon afterwards, some men from Ionia and Caria,<sup><a href="#note-1">1</a></sup> who had sailed away from home seeking plunder, were forced to land in Egypt. When they had disembarked and put on their bronze armor, an Egyptian who had gone into the marsh-land reported this to Psammetichus. Because he had not seen men in bronze armor before, he said that bronze men from the sea were plundering the plain. [5] Psammetichus realized that the oracle was being fulfilled, and he made friends with the Ionians and Carians; promising them huge rewards, he convinced them to work for him. Thus, with these men as allies and also with Egyptian volunteers, he overthrew the kings who had exiled him and made himself the king of all Egypt.
…
154. To the Ionians and Carians who had helped him become king, Psammetichus gave them places to live, located on opposite sides of the Nile, called the Camps, and also gave them everything else he had promised. [2] He also sent them Egyptian boys to be trained in the Greek language, and those who are now interpreters in Egypt are descended from these boys. [3] The Ionians and Carians lived there for a long time. The place is a short distance from the sea, just below the city of Bubastis, on the so-called Pelusian branch of the Nile. Later, King Amasis forced them out of that place and settled them at Memphis, making them his guards against the Egyptians. [4] It is by associating with these early settlers in Egypt that we Greeks know accurately the history of Egypt from the time of Psammetichus onwards, since they were the first foreigners to settle in Egypt.
