---
layout: items/selections
source_id: herodotus_histories
citation_start: 4.78
subjects: Greeks Overseas;Cultural Mixing
location_ids: istria;borysthenes;miletus
preface: "The activities of a Scythian king cross cultural boundaries, and demonstrate how open Greek cities could be to foreigners."
footnotes:
  - Another of the many Scythian peoples.
---

78. Scyles was one of many sons of Ariapeithes, king of the Scythians, but his mother was a Greek from Istria and not a native at all, and she taught him to read and speak Greek. [2] Some time later, Ariapeithes met his end due to the treachery of Spargapeithes, king of the Agathyrsians,<sup><a href="#note-1">1</a></sup> and Scyles became king. … [3] Scyles was king of the Scythians, but he was unhappy with the Scythian way of life; he inclined more towards Greek customs, due to how his mother had educated him. So he did as follows: whenever he led the Scythian army to Borysthenes (a Greek city whose inhabitants say that they came from Miletus originally), he would leave the army in the suburbs. [4] He himself would go inside the walls and close the gates, take off his Scythian clothing and put on Greek clothing, and would walk around the town wearing this, accompanied by nobody, not even his bodyguards – in fact, they guarded the gates so that none of the Scythians would see him wearing Greek clothing. He would live according to Greek customs in every other way, and would offer sacrifice to the gods in the Greek manner. [5] When he had spent a month or more doing this, he would put on his Scythian clothing again and leave. He did this often, and built a house in Borysthenes and married a local woman there.