---
layout: items/selections
source_id: herodotus_histories
citation_start: 4.150
citation_end: 59
subjects: Greeks Overseas;Colonization
location_ids: thera;cyrene;itanus;platea;aziris
preface: "Two alternate stories about the foundation of Cyrene by Battus of Thera, one told by the Therans and one by the Cyreneans."
footnotes:
  - A large sacrifice.
  - Battus means \"one who stammers.\"
  - I.e., rainfall was plentiful.
---

150. The Spartans and the Therans agree on the previous story [not included here], but the Therans alone are the source for what happened after that. [2] Grinnus the son of Aesanius, who was a descendent of the founder of Thera and king of the island, went to Delphi bringing a hecatomb<sup><a href="#note-1">1</a></sup> from the city. Many other citizens came with him, including Battus the son of Polymnestus, who was a descendant of Euphemus from the Minyan clan. [3] Grinnus asked the oracle about other matters, but the Pythia responded that he should found a city in Libya. He said, "Lord, I am already too old and sick to take on this task; order one of the younger men to do this." As he said this, he pointed at Battus. [4] No more was said at the time, and after they left they took no account of the oracle, since they did not know where the land of Libya was, nor did they dare to send a colony to an unclear location.

151. For seven years after this, it did not rain in Thera, and all the trees on the island withered up except one. They asked the oracle, and the Pythia brought up the colony they were supposed to found in Libya. [2] Since there was no other remedy for their troubles, they sent messengers to Crete to find out if any of the Cretans or their neighbors had ever gone to Libya. In their wanderings around the island of Crete, they came to the city of Itanus, they met a man named Corobius, a shellfish-harvester, who said that he had once been driven by the winds to Libya and an island there called Platea. [3] Persuading him with payment, they took him back to Thera, and then a few scouts first sailed out from Thera, with Corobius leading them. They went first to this island of Platea and left him there, leaving grain for several months with him, while the scouts sailed back to report to the Therans as quickly as possible about the island.

…

153. The Therans who had left Corobius behind arrived on Thera and announced that they had colonized the island offshore from Libya. The Therans decided to send out men from each of the seven districts in their city, choosing by lot one man from each pair of brothers, and that Battus would be their leader and king. In this way, they sent two 50-oared warships to Platea.

154. That’s what the Therans say, and for the rest of the story the Therans and Cyreneans agree. But the Cyreneans do not agree with the Therans at all about Battus. This is the Cyrenean story. …

155. Polymnestus, who was one of the elite in Thera, took a Cretan named Phronime as his concubine. In time a child was born to them, whom they named Battus, because he spoke with a speech impediment.<sup><a href="#note-2">2</a></sup> At least the Therans and Cyreneans say that was his name, but I think he was originally named something else. [2] In my opinion, his name was changed to Battus when he came to Libya, because of the oracle he received at Delphi and the office he came to hold, since the Libyan word for a king is "battus." Because of this, I think that the Pythia through her prophecy spoke to him in the Libyan language, knowing that he would become king in Libya. [3] When this boy grew up, he went to Delphi to ask about his speech impediment. The Pythia responded in these words: “Battus, you have come about your voice; but lord Phoebus Apollo sends you as founder to sheep-raising Libya." It’s just as if she had said in the Greek language, “King, you have come about your voice.” [4] He answered, "Lord, I came to ask you about my voice, but you tell me to do something impossible, to found a colony in Libya. In what way, with what hand, am I capable of this?” But the god simply prophesied the same as before, so Battus left while the priestess was still speaking, and went back home to Thera.

156. After this, things went very badly for Battus and the other Therans. Because they did not know the cause of their misfortunes, the Therans sent to Delphi to ask about their bad situation. [2] The Pythia responded that things would go better for them if they helped Battus found Cyrene in Libya. So they sent Battus with two 50-oared warships; these sailed to Libya but did not know what else to do, so they returned to Thera. [3] But the Therans would not allow them to land their ships, even shooting arrows at them, but ordered them to sail back to Libya. Those who were forced to sail back then founded a colony on an island offshore from Libya, whose name, as I said earlier, is Platea. This island is said to be as large as the city of Cyrene is now.

157. They lived there for two years, but since nothing went well, they left one man behind and the rest went to Delphi to consult the oracle, saying that they were living in Libya and still nothing went well. [2] The Pythia responded, “If you know sheep-raising Libya better than I do, when I have gone there and you have not, then I am truly amazed at your wisdom.” Hearing this, Battus and his men sailed back, since the god would not free them of the obligation to found a colony until they had done so in Libya itself. [3] So they stopped at the island to pick up the man they had left behind, and settled at a place on the mainland opposite the island called Aziris. This site is enclosed on both sides by very beautiful valleys, and a river flows along one side.

158. They lived there for six years. In the seventh year, the Libyans convinced them to leave, saying that they would show them a better place. [2] They led the Greeks westwards, calculating the hours of daylight so that they would lead the Greeks past the best place in the land at night, so the Greeks would not see it. This place is called Irasa. [3] Leading them to what is called the Spring of Apollo, they said, "Greek men, here is a good place for you to settle, for here the sky has been ripped open."<sup><a href="#note-3">3</a></sup> 

159. During the lifetime of Battus the founder, who ruled for forty years, and then of his son Arcesilaus, who ruled for sixteen years, the Cyreneans were no more in number than were sent out originally to the colony. [2] But in the time of the third king, Battus the so-called Fortunate, the Pythia encouraged all Greeks to sail out and join the Cyreneans in colonizing Libya. The Cyreneans invited them, promising a distribution of land. [3] The oracle said, "Whoever comes to lovely Libya after the land has been distributed – I say he will regret it later."