---
layout: items/selections
source_id: herodotus_histories
citation_start: 5.42
citation_end: 46
subjects: Greeks Overseas;Colonization
location_ids: sparta;cinyps_river;eryx;segesta;minoa;selinus
preface: "The failed attempt by Dorieus, prince of Sparta, to found a colony, suggests what not to do as a colonial founder."
footnotes:
  - The kings of Sparta claimed to be descendants of Heracles, so this would include Dorieus.
---

42. Dorieus was the leading light among the Spartans of his age, and he expected that he would succeed to the kingship because of his manly virtues. [2] However, when his father Anaxandridas died and the Spartans, applying their law, chose Cleomenes, the eldest son, as king, Dorieus thought this was terrible and refused to be subject to Cleomenes. So he asked the Spartans for a group of people to lead out as a colony. He did not consult the oracle at Delphi as to where he should go to found a colony, nor did he do anything else that was customary, but in great anger he left on a voyage to Libya, with some men from Thera as guides. [3] He arrived there and settled at the Cinyps river, in the most fertile part of Libya. But in the third year he was driven out by the Macae, Libyans, and Carthaginians, and returned to the Peloponnese.

43. There, Antichares of Eleon advised him, according to the oracles of Laius, to found Heraclea in Sicily, saying that the whole land of Eryx belonged to the descendants of Heracles,<sup><a href="#note-1">1</a></sup> since Heracles had conquered it. When Dorieus heard this, he went to Delphi to ask the oracle if he would seize the land to which he was departing, and the Pythia answered that he would. So Dorieus took the whole expedition, which he had previously led to Libya, along the coast of Italy.
…
46. Many other Spartiates sailed along with Dorieus as co-founders, including Thessalus, Paraibates, Celeas, and Euryleon, who came with the whole expedition to Sicily. They were slain in battle, however, defeated by the Phoenicians and Segestans. Euryleon was the only one of the co-founders to survive this disaster. [2] Taking up the survivors of the expedition, he seized Minoa, a colony of Selinus, and freed the Selinuntines from their tyrant Peithagoras. After deposing him, however, he tried to make himself tyrant of Selinus, but he only ruled for a short time, since the Selinuntines rose up and killed him after he had fled to the altar of Zeus in the agora.
