---
layout: items/selections
source_id: meiggs_lewis
citation_start: 5
subjects: Greeks Overseas;Colonization
location_ids: cyrene;thera
preface: "This inscription was carved in the 4th century BCE in Cyrene, a Greek colony in North Africa, but in the second paragraph purports to republish a decree originally passed in the 7th century BCE by the polis of Thera, Cyrene’s mother-city. Scholarly opinion is mixed, but leans towards colonization that were current then, rather than a genuine founding document."
footnotes:
  - Three types of civic organizations.
  - The text is damaged here.
---

God. Good fortune. Damis son of Bathycles made the motion. Regarding what Cleudamas son of Euthycles and the other Therans say, in order that the city prosper and the people of Cyrene enjoy good fortune, the city has decided to give citizenship to the Therans according to the ancestral practice, just as our ancestors did, both those who founded Cyrene from Thera and those who stayed in Thera, just as Apollo gave good fortune to Battus and to the Therans who founded Cyrene if they kept to their oaths, which our ancestors swore to them when they sent out the colony according to the dictates of Apollo the Founder. With good fortune. It has been decided by the people that the Therans shall enjoy equal citizenship in Cyrene in the same way as before. All Therans who are resident in Cyrene shall swear the same oath as the others swore before, and they shall be assigned to a tribe and phratry and the nine hetaireiai.<sup><a href="#note-1">1</a></sup> This decree shall be inscribed on a marble stele and placed in the ancestral temple of Pythian Apollo. The oath shall also be written on the stele, which the settlers swore when they sailed to Libya with Battus, from Thera to Cyrene. If any expenses are needed, either for the stone or the carving, the officials in charge of accounts shall pay it from the revenues of Apollo.

Oath of the colonists. It was decided by the assembly: since Apollo spontaneously ordered Battus and the Therans to found Cyrene, it seemed best to the Therans to send Battus to Libya as leader and king, and that Therans should sail there with him. They should sail on fair and equal terms according to household, choosing one son…<sup><a href="#note-2">2</a></sup> adults and other free men of Thera should sail. If the colonists establish the settlement, their kinsmen who sail to Libya later shall share in citizenship and officeholding, and receive an allotment of land not already owned by someone else. But if they do not establish the settlement and the Therans are unable to help them, but instead they are afflicted by hardship for five years, they may leave that land and return to Thera without penalty, retaining their own property and Theran citizenship. Anyone who refuses to sail when the city orders shall be condemned to death and his property shall be confiscated. Whoever receives or hides him, even if it be a father hiding a son or a brother hiding a brother will receive the same penalty as the man who refuses to sail. They swore to these conditions, both those who are staying here and those about to sail to the colony, and they called down curses upon those who transgress the oath, whether they are in Libya or here. They – all the men, women, boys, and girls together – molded wax figures and burned them, calling down this curse: “May whoever does not hold to this oath but breaks it dissolve and melt away like this wax figure, himself and his descendants and his property, but whoever holds to this oath, both of those who sail to Libya and those who stay here, may he receive much good fortune for himself and his descendants.”
