---
layout: items/selections
source_id: herodotus_histories
citation_start: 1.165
citation_end: 67
subjects: Greeks Overseas;Colonization
location_ids: phocaea;alalia;rhegium;elea;poseidonia
preface: "The people of Phocaea in Ionia decide to join a colony in the western Mediterranean in order to escape the Persian conquest of Asia Minor, in the 540s BCE."
footnotes:
  - Today the Tyrrhenian sea.
  - A victory in which both sides suffered serious losses.

---

165. The Phocaeans afterward set out for Corsica. Twenty years earlier, because of an oracle, they had sent out a colony to Corsica, called Alalia.… [2] Preparing to leave for Corsica, they first invoked strong curses against anyone of them who abandoned the expedition. [3] And besides that, they threw an iron ingot into the sea and swore that they would never return to Phocaea before the ingot appeared again. However, while they were sailing to Corsica, half of the citizens were afflicted by a yearning and pity for their home city and the lifestyle of their land, and broke their oaths by sailing back to Phocaea. Those who kept their oaths put out to sea.

166. When they arrived in Corsica, they spent five years living as one city with those who had come earlier, and established temples. They raided and plundered all their neighbors, and so the Etruscans and Carthaginians, developing a joint plan of action, attacked them with sixty ships each. [2] The Phocaeans manned their ships, which were sixty in number, and met them in what is called the Sardinian Sea.<sup><a href="#note-1">1</a></sup> When they clashed in the naval battle, the Phocaeans won, but it was a Cadmean victory,<sup><a href="#note-2">2</a></sup> since forty of their ships were destroyed, and the twenty that remained were unseaworthy, since their rams were twisted away. [3] So, returning to Alalia, they picked up their wives and children and as much of their property as they could, and sailed from Corsica to Rhegium.
…
167. [3] The Phocaeans who escaped to Rhegium set out from there and founded a city in Oenotrian territory, which they called Elea. [4] They founded this city because they learned from a man from Poseidonia that when the Pythia told them to establish Corsica, the god did not mean the island, but a hero by that name, for whom they also founded a temple.