---
layout: items/selections
source_id: moralia
citation_start: 7723-7736
subjects: Greeks Overseas;Colonization;
location_ids: syracuse;corinth
preface: "A story about the foundation of Syracuse in Sicily, which links the decision to found a colony to aristocratic culture, specifically pederasty."
---

Melissus had a son named Actaeon, the most beautiful and self-controlled young man of his age. He had many suitors, but especially Archias, who was a descendent of Heracles and the most prominent Corinthian in terms of wealth and power. When Archias was unable to persuade the young man to be his lover, he decided to use force and seize him. Gathering a large group of friends and servants, he went in a drunken revel to Melissus’ house and tried to carry off the boy. When his father and friends tried to resist, and neighbors also joined the fray and pulled on him, Actaeon was torn limb from limb and killed. The assailants ran away. Melissus brought the body of his son to the marketplace and showed it to the Corinthians, demanding justice from those who had done this. But the Corinthians did nothing except pity the man. Unsuccessful, Melissus went away and waited for the Isthmian festival. There, he went up to the temple of Poseidon and denounced the Bacchiads and reminded the god of the benefactions of his own father Habron. Calling the gods to witness, he threw himself down from the rocks. Soon after this, drought and plague fell upon the city. The Corinthians consulted the oracle about how to end these problems, and the god answered that the wrath of Poseidon would not let up until they avenged the death of Actaeon. Archias learned about this because he was one of those who went to consult the oracle, and willingly did not return to Corinth, but instead sailed to Sicily and founded Syracuse. There he became the father of two daughters, Ortygia and Syracousa, and was treacherously killed by Telephus, his lover, who had sailed with him to Sicily in command of a ship.