---
layout: items/selections
source_id: herodotus_histories
subjects: Greeks Overseas;Trade;Greek Identity
location_ids: naucratis;chios;teos;phocaea;clazomenae;rhodes;cnidus;halicarnassus;phaselis;mytilene;aegina;samos;miletus
citation_start: 1.178
citation_end: 9
preface: "Herodotus describes how the Egyptian pharaoh Amasis (570-526 BCE) gave Greeks permission to found one colony in Egypt, which would consolidate Greek trading activity in Egypt at a single port."
footnotes:
  - I.e. to Naucratis
---

178. Amasis, since he was a philhellene, did various other services for some of the Greeks, and especially he gave the city of Naucratis for Greeks arriving in Egypt to settle in, and to those travelers who did not want to live there permanently he gave land on which to establish altars and sanctuaries of the gods. [2] The greatest, most famous, and most visited of these sanctuaries is the so-called Hellenion, which a number of cities established in common: among the Ionians, Chios, Teos, Phocaea, and Clazomenae; among the Dorians, Rhodes, Cnidus, Halicarnassus, and Phaselis; and Mytilene along of the Aeolians. [3] This sanctuary belongs to those cities, which also provide the managing officers of the trading port. Separately, the Aeginetans established for themselves a sanctuary of Zeus; the Samians did the same for Hera and the Milesians for Apollo.

179. In older times, Naucratis was the only trading port in Egypt. If someone arrived at one of the other mouths of the Nile, he would have to swear that he did not sail there intentionally, and then sail his ship to the Canopic mouth of the Nile,<sup><a href="#note-1">1</a></sup>or if it was not possible to sail due to contrary winds, then he had to bring his cargo around the Nile Delta in smaller boats, until he arrived at Naucratis, since the status of Naucratis was so respected.